This video is brought to you by SquareSpace.
Stick around until the end of the video to
find out more, including how to sign up for
our SquareSpace powered Newsletter.
And if you’d like to help us keep making
queer content like this on Youtube, and even
see some of these videos up to six months
in advance — including videos covering Good
Omens, Sandman, Revolutionary Girl Utena,
and Evangelion — you can sign up for our
Patreon, linked in the description.
On a scorching day in rural Japan, we find
ourselves in the midst of a chilling tale,
where two boys, Yoshiki and Hikaru, seek solace
from the relentless heat by indulging in frozen
treats from a quaint local store.
Outdoors, amidst their laughter, a sudden
unease grips Yoshiki, prompting him to utter
these haunting words to his friend: "You ain't
the real Hikaru, are you?"
Hikaru, initially taken aback, undergoes a
startling transformation as his human facade
fades away, revealing the demonic spiritual
entity lurking within.
However, instead of unleashing his malevolence
upon Yoshiki, Hikaru surprises us all by embracing
his friend, pleading with him not to reveal
his true nature.
You see, this is the first time this new Hikaru
has experienced life as a human, even if he's
borrowing the old Hikaru's form – his feelings
for Yoshiki are undeniably genuine.
The real Hikaru may be lost, but Yoshiki,
consumed by grief and fear, accepts this new
Hikaru into his life, for he cannot bear to
be without his friend.
Thus begins the spine-tingling horror manga
"The Summer Hikaru Died" by the mangaka MokuMokuren.
It debuted in August of 2021, and has enjoyed
resounding commercial success, despite the
unease it provokes among commentators within
the medium who have a hard time categorising
it.
Is it a BL manga?
Is it horror?
Can it possibly be both?
The difficulty in classifying the genre of
this story itself puts us at an interesting
juncture.
With ‘gay boys’ being a genre all to their
own, perhaps this has set a precedent for
gay characters being unable to appear in other
genres.
Does the inclusion of a gay character automatically
facilitate a gay story?
It seems that among publishers and critics,
this may very well be the case.
Meaning that when a horror story about one
or possibly more gay characters becomes a
sensation, there’s a reluctance to discuss
it because it’s unclear whether it ought
to be judged on its merits as horror… or
as BL.
This speaks to a common complaint among nonbinary
people and some trans people as well.
Why does the inability to sort this thing
into one of two categories generate so much
confusion?
Is it gay or straight?
Are they a man or woman?
In either case, many people won’t neatly
fit into either of those groups, and it’s
just as incorrect to force people into these
categories as it is to omit people altogether
because they can’t pass.
Similarly, it’s also wrong to look at The
Summer Hikaru Died in the same way.
Genre classification limits the scope of what
a story can be, and is often biassed to what
the hegemonistic majority considers ‘normal.’
I wouldn’t take it as a good sign either
if it were classified as a ‘cross-genre’
for the same reason that we don’t consider
‘straight-horror’ to be a genre.
‘Boys kissing’ and ‘scary’ do not
need to be two different genres.
Because when you’re a gay boy living in
a rural village, kissing another boy is VERY
scary.
And it also seems that The Summer Hikaru died
explores many of these same horrors.
Even though whatever has replaced his friend
speaks with that voice and projects those
emotions, Yoshiki is left in mourning regardless.
Caught between ‘everything is different’
and ‘nothing has changed.’
Yoshiki grapples with the fact that Hikaru
still acts ‘normal’ while he feels that
he has lost something that he will never get
back.
This new Hikaru… though he smiles, laughs,
and cries just like his predecessor, is not
the same.
The-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru has adopted
all of Hikaru’s memories and feelings.
Pragmatically — this Hikaru ought to be
no different than the previous one.
Yoshiki is unsure if he can go on with his
life without a clear answer, though.
No matter how much Yoshiki wishes this thing
were still Hikaru, some things are just...
off, especially at first.
He exhibits an unnatural enthusiasm for mundane
experiences, and even kind-hearted animals
cower in his presence.
But The-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru is just
so thankful for his friend’s acceptance
— for Yoshiki to show kindness to ‘someone
like him.’
However, Yoshiki grapples internally.
He questions his own sanity for embracing
this being, this entity that once was his
friend.
His disquiet only intensifies when some townsfolk
react to Hikaru as if he were the very monster
that had taken residence within him.
It’s important to note that this new Hikaru
never harmed the real one.
While some may be hesitant to trust a monster,
this is confirmed in a flashback.
The original Hikaru, dying alone in the forest,
had pleaded for someone to protect Yoshiki,
and that's when this enigmatic spirit inhabited
his body.
Now it carries the warmth and love Hikaru
felt for Yoshiki, vowing to safeguard him
by any means necessary.
The-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru lacks the social
awareness of being a born-and-raised human,
and declares the feelings that the previous
Hikaru had kept hidden from Yoshiki: that
“he’s crazy for him”
Which ought to betray any doubt that Hikaru
is gay or gay-questioning.
While it is not a specific classification
on his part, the phrasing and context of this
line says all that it needs to.
Subtly shouldn’t need to be specific to
be apparent.
What isn’t subtle is that there is something
much darker and more ominous lurking in this
quaint little town than our sweet Hikaru.
The forest covered mountain itself is alive,
teeming with spirits, some far less benign
than the one residing within this boy.
When a group of their school friends takes
a shortcut through the forest one day, they
feel uneasy, especially Yoshiki.
There's an ominous presence watching them,
drawing nearer.
It lunges at Yoshiki, attempting to possess
him, but Hikaru steps in, absorbing the spirit,
battling it to shield his friend.
The fight even makes his nose bleed.
Hikaru warns Yoshiki about spirits… that
they're lonely and latch onto anyone who gazes
upon them.
He advises Yoshiki to avoid looking at any
spirits, except for him.
Yet, Hikaru is not as adept at concealing
his secrets as he believes.
One of their friends, a girl named Asako,
senses something amiss.
She can't quite put her finger on it, but
she knows that Hikaru's nosebleed was no random
occurrence.
Curiosity gnawing at him, Yoshiki longs to
understand how Hikaru took the spirit inside
him.
Unable to convey it verbally, Hikaru decides
to demonstrate it physically.
When they are alone, he exposes a dark slit
in his chest, inviting Yoshiki to plunge his
hand inside.
The spirit beyond the form of Hikaru is tumultuous,
chaotic, and cold.
A sensation Yoshiki compares towards raw chicken
in marinade.
Hikaru finds great pleasure in the feeling
of a warm body — a sensation he cannot even
recall having as a spirit.
Unexpectedly, he draws the arm deeper inside
of him, sending Yoshiki into a panic.
Reeling away, Hikaru laughs and tries to assure
Yoshiki that he was never in any harm.
Just horsing around.
This is a pivotal scene for framing the whole
of the series, and cementing this story as
not only containing gay characters, but presenting
gay experiences.
Without being explicit, this scene portrays
a representation of sexual experimentation.
While Hikaru’s enjoyment is apparent, Yoshiki
is confused as to whether he likes the sensation
or not.
Hikaru, while abiding by consent, does push
boundaries — a bit too fast for Yoshiki.
Moving at different speeds is also a hallmark
of developing queer identity.
To Yoshiki, there is an element of danger
with this.
And this danger articulates an ongoing theme
in the series about the-thing-that replaced-Hikaru:
should we be afraid of it or not?
Because an act of Hikaru ‘just playing around’
is a horror to Yoshiki.
Regardless that Hikaru himself is aware of
the difference between ‘play’ and ‘harm,’
Yoshiki does not know the limitations and
abilities of this spirit.
Being harmless and meaning no harm are two
different things.
A question that persistently looms over the
head of the-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru.
These anxieties compound within Yoshiki.
In addition to his questions of whether he
can think of the-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru
as Hikaru, he now has questions about his
own feelings for himself.
In the fever of this internal struggle, he
has a chance encounter with a woman from town.
She does not recognize him… but she recognizes
something about him.
She reveals that she used to sense an ominous
presence emanating from the mountainous forest…
the very mountains where Hikaru met his end.
However, she remarks that the malevolence
that once resided far away has now crossed
into the village.
And she spies that this malevolence has touched
Yoshiki.
Expressing concern for him, she explains that
as humans draw closer to spirits and the realm
of spirits, they become ‘mixed.’
She warns that Yoshiki is doomed if he continues
his entanglement with the-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru.
The first of a series of warnings against
‘mixing’ with others who should remain
separate.
This revelation deepens Yoshiki's disquiet
around Hikaru, though guilt gnaws at him whenever
they are together, for Hikaru is unfailingly
kind, professing that just being near Yoshiki
brings him joy.
But that’s not a mutual feeling for Yoshiki.
The way Hikaru looks, sounds, talks, it’s
all Hikaru… but he’s not Hikaru.
But the spirit can’t let Yoshiki go because
he feels everything Hikaru felt.
He liked him too much.
His feelings for Yoshiki were so strong that
even after death they remain, and they bind
the spirit to him.
Terrified, Yoshiki demands that Hikaru leave
him be, claiming he no longer needs him.
This sends Hikaru spiralling into despair,
questioning why he isn't enough.
What’s really so different about him?
He’s the same person, more or less, only
one thing has changed, and it’s not even
something most people can see.
He just doesn’t want Yoshiki to hate him.
The next day Yoshiki apologises.
In tears, Hikaru tells Yoshiki he just wants
to be near him, that’s all.
That’s all that he needs.
To please just not hate him.
Instead of forsaking his friend, Yoshiki opts
to stand by Hikaru's side, heedless of the
ominous warnings he has received.
The once-fearful animals gradually warm up
to Hikaru, and he joins Yoshiki and his younger
sister at a summer festival, just like any
ordinary kid.
But has to turn back when he comes up against
a Torii gate, blocking this spirit from entering
the Shinto shrine.
So Yoshiki gets some shaved ice for both of
them and they eat it outside the gate.
There, Yoshiki reveals something to Hikaru
that his friend didn’t know.
That he’d actually seen Hikaru’s dead
body.
The stormy night he went missing, Yoshiki
trudged out into the rain, marching through
the forest until he found his friend’s body,
unresponsive.
The trauma left him bedridden for days and
when he finally came around…
Hikaru was alive.
This new Hikaru was alive.
He grieved the loss of his closest friend
for days before finding out that he was still
here, in some way.
He thought it was a dream.
But even now, sitting next to Hikaru as he
is… he misses his old friend.
In response, Hikaru pledges to Yoshiki that,
although he may never truly replace the original,
he will always cherish and protect him.
However, at this point in the manga, we take
a departure from the tale to uncover a council
of individuals well-versed in the spiritual
happenings of the area.
Something known as "Kubitachi's Burden" has
escaped the confines of the forest and infiltrated
the town.
As a result, they've enlisted the services
of an expert to investigate this phenomenon
firsthand.
This spells danger for Hikaru, and also Yoshiki.
The pair begin growing close again.
Yoshiki even puts his hand in Hikaru’s body
once more, this time permitting himself to
wonder if it does feel good, in spite of telling
himself it ought to feel wrong.
But getting this close to Hikaru might be
dangerous, according to some.
It might attract other things from the spiritual
side toward Yoshiki.
Things more dangerous and unpredictable than
his smiling friend.
Like some sort of demon lurking in Yoshiki’s
shower drain that attacks his little sister.
A demon Hikaru promises to deal with… but
when Hikaru seems to be taking too long Yoshiki
becomes worried, and comes to rescue him.
The demon takes the opportunity to lunge into
Yoshiki, take over his mind and forces him
to try and drown Hikaru.
The demon is expelled and escapes, giving
Yoshiki a glimpse into the danger that spirits
present.
As time marches on, the council of village
elders redoubles their efforts to unearth
the truth behind the elusive forest spirit's
escape.
One fateful night, amidst a gathering of friends,
Hikaru and Yoshiki find themselves separated,
leaving Hikaru alone with Asako.
The young girl delves into memories of Hikaru
from before his mysterious disappearance and
then poses a daunting question to the new
Hikaru:
"Who exactly are you?"
Asako has a familial history of sensing spirits.
Some may see them as faint shadows, but Asako
can hear them.
Even though she can sense that there is something
paranormal about Hikaru, she does not fear
him.
She recalls an experience where she encountered
an invisible spirit calling for her attention
on a village road.
Trying to live by her family’s rules of
remaining separate from spirits, she eventually
realised that this spirit was trying to warn
her — her best friend was crossing a blind
corner where a driver was speeding.
The spirit saved her friend’s life.
While other characters who are aware of spirits
believe that not all spirits are malevolent,
they hold the caveat that — because some
are dangerous, that we must be suspicious
of all.
Asako simply does not have this outlook.
Instead, showing a willingness to allow the
spirit to show its true colours.
Just as she affords that same opportunity
to the-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru.
Noticing for the first time that she can see
him differently than others, the-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru
tries to show her his true form, that which
he can only describe to Yoshiki.
Perhaps she can see him for what he truly
is, stripped of the physical form.
He does, after all, repeatedly mention that
spirits are lonely, and long to be seen — is
he truly so different?
Their connection, while brief, causes Asako
to collapse — just as Yoshiki is in view.
In a frantic state, he fears that Hikaru may
have killed her.
The-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru expresses confusion
at these anxieties.
He struggles to grasp the distinction between
life and death.
Not a foreign concept to him, entirely, but
he simply sees no empirical difference between
something alive, and the same thing while
dead.
Thankfully, Asako regains consciousness, having
merely fainted.
Remarkably, her first concern isn't for her
own well-being but for Hikaru's.
She recognizes that he's been possessed and
seems willing to help, but Yoshiki cannot
bear the weight of it all and decides to depart,
leaving Hikaru to ponder the profound questions
of life and death alone.
Hikaru wrestles with existential questions,
contemplating the meaning of being alive.
He dreads the thought of losing those he cares
about, especially Yoshiki.
He's uncertain whether his thoughts are truly
his own or remnants of the old Hikaru's consciousness
lingering within him.
What he fears most is that he may have irreparably
driven Yoshiki away.
However, when Yoshiki unexpectedly appears
at Hikaru's doorstep on Monday, offering to
take him to school, Hikaru is both astonished
and elated.
To his compounded delight: Yoshiki proposes
to cut class and embark on a day of fun together.
They visit the movies, savour popsicles, and
spend time reading manga.
For the first time since Hikaru's transformation,
it feels like Yoshiki is making an earnest
effort to bring happiness into Hikaru's life,
reminiscent of the days of their youth, before
Hikaru's apparent demise and the arrival of
the new Hikaru.
Yet, Yoshiki's intentions take a shocking
and brutal turn as he plunges a knife into
Hikaru's abdomen.
His plan was to grant Hikaru one final day
of joy before ending his existence, but Hikaru
does not succumb.
Hikaru’s physical form does not have the
same limitations as a normal human.
Overwhelmed by despair, Yoshiki realises that
things can never return to the way they were.
This new Hikaru will not release him from
his grief.
Consequently, he implores Hikaru to kill him.
Instead, Hikaru chooses to demonstrate his
trust for Yoshiki, by giving himself a mortal
vulnerability.
Reaching into himself, he pulls roughly half
of his spirit from his body, and condenses
it into a small stone for Yoshiki to keep.
With Hikaru’s spirit now ‘small’ enough
to be harmed by lethal force, he hopes Yoshiki
can trust him.
Deciding to move forward as friends, the boys
stand before another hurdle: to truly trust
each other, they need to know what the-thing-that-replaced-Hikaru
was before it became Hikaru.
The why and the how already known.
Yoshiki takes the fragment of Hikaru’s spirit
and decides to help him find out what he really
is.
During their investigation they discover their
little village, called Mount Hope, was once
a much larger domain, but near the end of
the Edo period, split into the five smaller
villages it exists as today.
The split was caused by famine, economic strife,
and a number of strange, unexplainable deaths.
Locals attribute those deaths now to the Lord
Brain Snatcher, a malevolent god within the
mountainous forest that plagued the people
of the domain.
But it’s believed to have been trapped within
the boundaries of the forest ever since the
famine.
Like the deaths might have actually been sacrifices
in a protective ritual against it.
And Hikaru’s family, for centuries, have
been the protectors of the boundary.
Going into the mountains to conduct a ritual
that would keep solid the barrier between
the realm of the Lord Brain Snatcher and the
human world.
But when Hikaru died performing it, and then
came back, he brought something back with
him.
Is Hikaru the Lord Brain Snatcher?
Or is he something else?
This, as of now, is where the story has left
off…
We can see Hikaru as dead, possessed by an
imposter.
But shunning this new creature doesn’t change
the fact that the original Hikaru is gone.
Alternatively, we can observe this spirit’s
intervention as a chance encounter to allow
Hikaru to live on.
I consider the latter more optimistic.
Aren’t people always changing anyway?
A person cannot walk through the same river
twice — they are no longer the same person,
nor is it the same river.
What is this possession but another, albeit
radical, form of change?
The alternative is that Hikaru stays dead.
The lingering question hanging in the air
is the mystery of intention.
What is this story trying to say?
Perhaps it’s as indicative of queer experiences
as I’ve outlined — indeed it is focused
on a queer character.
But how does the author plan on moralising
this?
What should we DO about the monster?
Is the monster even something to be feared?
Or is this a looming cautionary tale about
‘mixing’ with the others?
This is information we do not as of yet have.
Mangakas are notorious for their anonymity
— and for good reason.
For manga — what is on the page, is what
is intended to be read.
Everything else is what you bring and take
away from it.
Only as the tale unfolds will we understand.
And what this has to say about mixing — that
depends entirely on what Hikaru is.
Is Hikaru truly the Lord Brain-Snatcher?
There are many spirits…
perhaps he is another?
After all, the elder council references Kubitachi's
Burden… is this the Brain Snatcher?
Or something else?
A protective force created to keep the evil
spirits within the dark domain of the mountain
forest?
Perhaps this is what Hikaru is instead.
However, I choose to believe the resolution
will support a mixing of human and spirit.
They are not without vulnerabilities… and
we are not without strengths.
After all, there are various humans in this
story who generate as much — or more — threat
than the lonely, needy spirits.
And there are some who are even as hostile
and chaotic as the malicious ones.
We fear the spirits only because we are not
familiar with their intentions.
In English we have a phrase: better the devil
you know.
I generally prefer to trust creators, and
people in creative fields for having the best
of intentions — for leaning towards social
growth and acceptance, leaning towards ‘mixing.’
At least… until they show their true colours
otherwise.
Art speaks to a need for human connection,
anthropologically.
The role of art across the human experience
is to bring people together through universalities
of life and existence.
Biography or allegory make no difference — the
goal is connection.
To be seen and to see another; to find joy
in commonalities, to normalise what the divisive
nature of society considers taboo.
Art for the sake of division, or isolation
is of no use to us — perhaps it cannot even
be called art.
Art meant to warn people against ‘the other’
is art that’s intention is divisive, not
connective.
Art meant to unite one group of people just
to exclude another is to pander to the archaic
days of human tribalism, for which thousands
of years of art have been tirelessly trying
to correct.
Perhaps because I recognize a connection between
this half-way-dead boy, his confused best
friend, and a world which wants to keep them
apart; I see this example of art trying to
argue that our need to connect is stronger
than our ability to separate.
And instead of shunning what we don’t understand,
or what we fear, Hikaru will teach us to show
empathy, compassion, and patience to those
who are different, who don’t fit in, and
even those who are, by many, considered monsters.
This video was brought to you by SquareSpace.
SquareSpace is an all-in-one web design and
hosting platform that makes it easy for you
to create a website and market your brand.
With industry-leading website templates that
are easy to customise, you don’t need any
design experience to show the world your best
digital self.
SquareSpace also makes it easy to keep in
touch with your audience or customers.
With their expertly designed email templates,
that are just as easy to customise as their
websites, you can follow up with customers
or keep your audience in the loop with your
latest updates.
That’s why we’re launching a newsletter.
With certain social media sites going the
way of the Do-Do, we wanted a way to keep
in touch with our amazing subscribers, and
SquareSpace gives us the perfect way to do
that.
In fact you can sign up for our newsletter
right now (which will include links to new
videos, progress updates for Telos Pictures,
as well as reviews, articles, and so much
more.)
You can sign up at our SquareSpace website:
jamessomerton.com.
And You can head to squarespace.com right
now for a free trial and when you’re ready
to launch your site go to squarespace.com/jamess,
that’s j-a-m-e-s-s to save 10% off of your
first purchase of a website or domain.